**Eric Diep, CS 725 - Homework 9**

[CS 725 - Homework 9 Visualization](http://www.cs.odu.edu/~ediep/cs725/CS725-HW9/)

# Introduction
Water is essential to human survival. Having access to water is nice, but having access to clean water is better. Without clean water, the opportunity for diseases and infection increases. Most importantly, children growing up should have access to clean water because their immune system is still developing. When there is no access to clean drinking water or sanitation, diarrhoeal diseases is the most common killer among children. According to UNICEF, in 2016, diarrhoeal diseases was the cause of approximately 8% of all deaths among children under 5. The question I attempt to address with a visualization is can we identify correlation between having access to basic drinking water and sanitation, and mortality for children under 5 years caused by diarrhoeal diseases in South American countries? 

# Data
The datasets were provided by the World Health Organization as CSV files. The datasets used are [basic and safely managed sanitation services data by country](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.WSHSANITATION?lang=en), [basic and safely managed drinking water services data by country](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.WSHWATER?lang=en), and [causes of child death; proportion of deaths by cause](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.ghe3002015-SUR?lang=en).

In the datasets, basic and safely managed sanitation services / drinking water services, each contain a list of alphabetically ordered countries. For each country, there are columns populated with the percentage of population using either basic or managed sanitation services. These percentage values are further split between rural and urban areas. The dataset has values between the years 2000 and 2015.

The last dataset, causes of child death, contain a list of causes of death among children under 5 years. For each causes, there are columns populated with the percentage of children under 5 years who passed because of the cause. There are further age categories: 0 - 27 days, 1 - 59 months, 0 - 4 years. The dataset has values between the years 2000 and 2016.

As stated from my [notebook for homework 7](https://git-community.cs.odu.edu/ediep/CS725-HW7/blob/master/NOTEBOOK.md), the aspect to highlight for the sanitation and drinking water services is the percentage of population in rural areas with access to basic drinking and sanitation services. Specifically for South American countries. Thus, the visualization does not represent all areas which make up each country.

The aspect to higlight for the causes of child death dataset is the percentage of children under 5 years who died because of diarrhoeal diseases in the South America countries. Mortality caused by diarrhoeal diseases is selected from the list of causes because it is the leading cause of child mortality when clean drinking water and sanitation is readily available. Since we are only looking at data representing children under 5 years, the visualization does not account for all other age categories in the population. This dataset does not drill down to the level of representing children in rural or urban areas. Thus, the percentage value represents the children from the country's population.

The dataset for causes of child death had further age categories under 5 years. I wanted to know the total percentage of child death caused by diarrhoeal diseases, so I added the values for 0 - 27 days, and 1 - 59 months. The value populating 0 - 4 years column was not added because I assumed it was included in the value populating the 1 - 59 months since 59 months is 4.9 years. The value populating the column 0 - 27 days is added to the value populationg 1 - 59 months to account for children before 1 month. By adding the values together, I derived a new value which represents all children under 5 years. With the dervied value, the user would not be able to further drill down.

From these three datasets, the story to show is for rural areas as access to basic drinking water and sanitation increases, the percentage of children under 5 years dying because of diarrhoeal diseases will decrease.

# Visualization
The final visualization is a single graph displaying multiple lines. Each line represents the categories: access to basic drinking services, access to basic sanitation services, and child mortality caused by diarrhoeal diseases. On the graph, the user is able to mouseover the graph to view the values for each categories in each year at the same time. Allowing the user to view the values as they mouse over the graph aids in seeing how the percentage value fluctuates. Also the points which appear aids the user in seeing how the line trend. 

Since the question is in regards to South American countries, there is a drop-down selection to allow the user to change the country to view the graph for the other countries. If possible, the user would be able to compare the trend between other South American countries. This visualization aids in answering the question, can we identify correlation between having access to basic drinking water and sanitation, and mortality for children under 5 years caused by diarrhoeal diseases in South American countries? Using the visualization, we can compare the trend of child mortality between countries and access to drinking water and sanitation, and identify if child mortality is decreasing or increasing depending on how access to drinking water and sanitation services trends. 

# Design Decision
The line chart was used because it would be easier for the user to spot trends, and compare the categories. Multiple lines were drawn in one graph to off load user's cognitive memory of how the line goes. The label at the end of the line allows to user to focus on graph rather than needing to look elsewhere for a legend. The red points during mouseover movement highlights the values for each category by catching the user's attention. In addition, the points can help the user see how the line slopes when change in value is minor. The values appearing next to the points gives an actual value for the user to view rather than having them guess the value. The values on the x-axis is ordered with the most recent year towards the end. Since we read from left to right, it was fitting to put the most recent year towards the end. As stated in "Data" section, to percentage value for child mortality was dervied. I decided to derive the value to account for all ages under 5 years. I attempted to use an active title to give a brief statement as to what the user should take away when viewing the graph.

# Development Process
In total, about 19 hours was spent on developing the visualization. The aspects which took to most time was finding a good question to answer by a visualization, finding the data necessary to answer the question, and figuring out how the data needed to be formatted or split. A decent amount of time was also spent on reading D3 tutorials, and using Chrome's DevTools to understand more of the how the visualization was being generated.

The dataset for causes of death among children under 5 years was enormous, and overwhelming to work with at first. I wanted to included multiple causes of death, but decided against it, and selected a single cause. If multiple causes were used, the graph would have been busy. The dataset did not have all the countries in one file; each country had its only file. I had to download 11 CSV files, and aggregate into a single file which had the 11 countries and their percentage value of death caused by diarrhoeal diseases. When I found out I was able to generate a line chart with multiple lines, I had to create a file for each country. Each file contained the year, values for access to drinking water and sanitation, and values for death proportion. When it came to implementing the visualization, I spent ample time reading and viewing tutorials.

# References
- [Basic and safely managed sanitation services Data by country by World Health Organization](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.WSHSANITATION?lang=en)
- [Basic and safely managed drinking water services Data by country by World Health Organization](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.WSHWATER?lang=en)
- [Causes of child death; Proportion of deaths by cause by World Health Organization](http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.ghe3002015-SUR?lang=en)
- [UNICEF - Common Water and Sanitation Related Disease](https://www.unicef.org/wash/index_wes_related.html)
- [d3-time-format](https://github.com/d3/d3-time-format)
- [Multi-Series Line Chart by Mike Bostock](https://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/3884955)
- [Update data with button press by d3noob](http://bl.ocks.org/d3noob/7030f35b72de721622b8)
- [Multi-Series Line Chart with Multi-Mouseover by Eric Bunch](http://bl.ocks.org/eric-bunch/0bdef4942ac085a93fa6bd31452cd55c)